---
aliases: ["Book of Lamentations", "Eichah", "Lamentationes Jeremiae Prophetae", "Lamentations", "Lamentations of Jeremiah", "Lamentations of Jeremias", "Θρῆνοι", "איכה"]
---


# Book of Lamentations
- [[Lamentations 1]]
- [[Lamentations 2]]
- [[Lamentations 3]]
- [[Lamentations 4]]
- [[Lamentations 5]]



# Lamentations
- "Christ as the Temple Destroyed"
- Written by Jeremiah, his "lament" over the destruction over the [[Destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem]]
- Featured during [[Paschal Triduum (Evening of Holy Thursday to Evening of Easter Sunday, Holiest 3 Days of Christian Calendar)]]


##### [[2024-04-29]] From [[New St. Thomas Institute (NSTI)|NSTI]]:
Today we look at the Book of Lamentations which was written by Jeremiah. We looked to who Jeremiah was in a previous lesson. This book is often forgotten and neglected, but it is featured at the most important time of the Catholic liturgical year. And that is during [[Paschal Triduum (Evening of Holy Thursday to Evening of Easter Sunday, Holiest 3 Days of Christian Calendar)]] during Monday, Thursday when there was the last supper Good Friday when Christ was crucified and Holy Saturday, when Christ was in the tomb, lamentations is Jeremiah's lament over the destruction of the temple. And we know that Jesus Christ is the true temple of God where God's presence fully resides because he is cons substantial with the father. And so the church reads this at Tenebrae, which is the Matins and Laws of Monte Thursday. Good Friday and Holy Saturday, traditionally speaking in the traditional Roman rite. And so today, we're gonna look at the book of Lamentations in its historical context, but also see it in its relationship with Jesus Christ in his suffering and his death, as he said, destroy this temple. And in three days, it will be up again. So we see ultimately the lament is the destruction of God's temple in Jesus Christ, looking forward to his resurrection.

So let's study. Lamentations. Lamentations is five chapters long and the Hebrew word for it is a home which means how introducing a question how and it comes from the opening line of lamentations which reads like this. How do the city sit solitary? That was full of people? How is the mistress of the gentiles become as a widow, the princes of the province made tributary. So that's lamentations. 11. And the book is a lyrical or poetic lament of the prophet Jeremiah. He prophesized of the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem. And now he has seen it come to pass. So you can think of Jeremiah sitting on a hill looking at the city of Jerusalem. The temple has been destroyed and the city has been destroyed. And we also know from the book of Maccabees that Jeremiah was the one who took the ark of the covenant from the holy of Holies and hid it away. So it wouldn't be destroyed by the Babylonians. So Jeremiah is very close, not only to the prophecies of the destruction of Jerusalem, but also to the rescue of the Ark and to the lament over the city. Once it's happened since this book is Jeremiah lamenting over the destroyed city. Many scholars have seen this as a funeral dirge which is mourning the death, the literal death of Jerusalem and hoping for the eventual resurrection of Jerusalem, which of course applies to Jesus Christ. Now Jews read this book on the fasting day of Tisha beav, that's the ninth day of av this is commemorates the day in which the first temple was destroyed. And then also the second temple was destroyed by the Romans. Now, prior to the [[Second Vatican Council (Vatican II)]], Catholic Christians chanted the five chapters of lamentations during the [[Tenebrae (Latin for "Darkness")]] of Holy Tram as I stated already. And as you'll see on your screen, you can see how lamentations is broken up over those three days. So Monday, Thursday, we read lamentations. One good Friday is lamentations, chapters two into three and then Holy Saturday is lamentations part of chapter three all the way in through chapter five. So the allegorical meaning is obvious, the destruction of temple is akin to the destruction of Jesus Christ on the cross and then his eventual resurrection as the true temple of God. We were recently in the holy land on a pilgrimage with some of our new Saint Thomas Institute students. And we came across this idea that as Catholics, we don't have to go to the holy land to see the temple. It's not there anyway, or to find the ark of the covenant. Rather Jesus Christ, fully God, fully man present to us in the Eucharist is the body of Christ. He is the resurrected temple and he's present to all of us no matter where you live in Africa, Asia, the new world Christ temple. His body is present to us with all that being said, let's look at the structure of lamentations. As I mentioned, it's five chapters and it breaks down into five poems. Chapters 12 and four have 22 verses. Why? Because the Hebrew alphabet has 22 letters and it follows this pattern. Chapter three on the other end has 66 verses which is 22 times three. And each of the lines begin with the letter of the Hebrew alphabet. And then chapter five is not an acrostic, but it still has 22 verses. So Jeremiah here is using this pattern of 22 over and over and over with the Hebrew alphabet to root it in the Hebrew tradition and also to show completeness that he's covering every single letter. Now, the outline chapter one is Jerusalem as desolate, lamenting. She's a weeping widow. In chapter two, her miseries are described in connection with the national sins. And then the judgment of God. Chapter three is the hope for the people of God. The chastisement would only be for their good, a better day would dawn for them. And it's interesting because the Coptic orthodox church chants chapter three on Good Friday at the burial of Jesus, connecting these two ideas. Chapter four laments the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple and explains it because of sin. It's the wages of sin. This has happened. And then the last chapter chapter five is prayer that Zion's reproach may be taken away and the repentance and recovery of the people will bring back a restoration, we might say, as Christians, a true resurrection of Christ. So in conclusion, what are the theological principles that we should take home? And what's maybe an application we can perform as Catholics? Well, first of all, the profound message of lamentation is that God willed the destruction of Jerusalem on account of human sin and that this destruction would ultimately bring about redemption for the people. Sound familiar, sounds like the New Testament, doesn't it? Secondly, it's the atonement theology of the New Testament. Christ is the temple and the church is Jerusalem Christ. The temple is crucified and that action redeems the city. What's the city in the New Testament? The city of God is always the church. Third Christ as temple is rebuilt after three days. And the city that is the church rises with Christ as well, just as Christ rises, we rise with him from sin, from death into newness of life. So those are the theological implications. I'd like to challenge you to attend. One of the 10 services are usually at traditional Catholic churches or traditional Latin mass parishes. But to attend the Tenere and listen to the lamentations, maybe read along and see the allegory. See the analogy of what Jeremiah's explained the Old Testament and how it applies to our own lives as Christians in the New Testament.
